# Transactions and Concurrency
untill now we have seen seen how to deal with single query of database systems. but what if we want to execute multiple queries in a single time? and insure effeciency and relibility and avoid failures. thats where transaction manager comes in.

transaction manager has two subcomponents: 
- lock manager: handle concurrency control issues.
- Logging and Recovery: responsible for fault tolerance and recovery.

any application that needs any information from the database composed of multiple sql query generated by user behaviour, and maybe there many user trying to access the database at the same time. database has to handle those multible users and be correct.

## Concurrency Control 
- insure correct and fast data access in presnce of concurrent work by many user. 
- gives the user illusion of working in order.

## Recovery  
- ensuring fault tolerance and recovery database must have way to deals with bugs, errors, power, media failures. 
- storage gurantese of mission critical data. 

programmer doesn't have to worry about power, media failures, bugs, errors. it's all handled by the database.


## advantages of concurrent execution 
- throughput: num of quries per second maximixe with multicore proccessors. 
- Latency: responce time per transaction. 
    - multible queries are executed in parallel instead of waiting for other quireis to be excuted.
    - one query latency need to be not dependent on the other queries.
    - lightweight queries are not bottellnecked on more time-consuming quires. 


## Problems with concurrent execution 
- **incosistent read**: if user update one table and then update other table. ruser2 access table which not updated yet then table 1 which is updated. 
- **Lost Updates**: two users trying to update the same table user one finishs update before user2. then user2 update done it will overwrite the changes of user 1 and be losted.
- **Dirty Read**: user reads updates that was never committed. user 1 update not completed and aborted by the dbms. user 2 reads the data before roll back.


## Transactions 
a sequnce of multible actions read/write that to be excuted as an atomic unit. either all actions are executed or none of them are executed.
e.g transfer money from one account to another. 
reading account 
updateing account 
writing to account

in SQL
- begin transaction
- execute queries
- commit transaction

Transaction is an abstract view of an application program(activity). a sequence of read and writes of database objects. 
batch of work that be commited or aboted. 
progarm logic is invisible to the database. all it sees is the read/write ops.

# ACID


## Atomicity
- all or nothing property, all the actions should be occure or none of them should be. 

## Consistency
- if the DB starts out consistent, its ends up consistent.  
- consistency id defined by the DBMS integrity constraints.


## Isolation
- excution of each transaction is isolated from other transactions.
- dbms **interleave** actions of many transactions. and ensures that two transactions are not **interfere**.
- final result must be idntical of the result of serial execution.
## Durability
- if transaction is commited, its state is persisted. 

A transaction ends in one of two ways: 
- commit: all the actions are executed. changes needs to be reflected in the database.
-  abort: system crash while Txn is running. no changes are made to the database. 

- Two key properties for a transaction
    - Atomicity: Either execute all its actions (committed), or none of them (aborted)
    - Durability: The effects of a committed txn must survive failures.
- DBMS typically ensures the above by logging all actions:
    - Undo the actions of aborted/failed transactions.
    - Redo actions of committed transactions not yet propagated to disk when system crashes


## Concurrency Control

#### Transaction schedule 
- a sequence of actions on data from one or more transactions. 
- serial schedule: each transaction run from start to end without interfering with other transactions.
- serilaizable: if involves the same Txn, each Txn ordered the same, leave the db at in the same final state.  

## conflicting operations
1. The operations are from different transactions
2. Both operations operate on the same resource
3. At least one operation is a write